All right.
In this lecture we are gonna be learning about how to work with databases.
And we're gonna work the particular type of database called an S Q L lite database.
So if you haven't heard of Eskew well before it stands for server query and language it's a basic way
to store some data inside of something called a database and then access it that information and edit
it change it delete it whatever you need to do and you might be wondering and I don't even know what
a database is.
Well just think of a database as a place to store large amounts of information when and when you think
about databases at their very biggest.
Think about a company like Facebook or Twitter where they have to store millions and millions of Facebook
posts or millions and millions of tweets.
I mean maybe that even gets up into the billions.
But you know it has to store all this information in something called the database.
And the awesome thing about databases is they're really good about handling large amounts of information
like that so our shared preferences that we've been working with before for example if we wanted to
store let's say for example we're making an app that was going to catalog all of our music.
So you know music that has a bunch of artists and those artists have albums and those albums have songs
and stuff like if we had 40000 songs that we wanted to list inside of a string array that would go terribly
if we tried to save that in the shared preferences and take a long time to save.
But with a database that's built to handle something like that it could go much much faster and process
that in a much better way for the user.
So what I want to teach you is how to work with an ask you old database and then through this you'll
see how you can store information and ultimately the more robust of an application you want.
You're gonna want to tend to side more with.
Q Well databases versus you know if it's kind of a smaller task shared preferences might work.
But I want to show you a little bit more of what the heavy duty world is like so let's go ahead and
create a new Android Studio project.
I think we can just go ahead and call this database demo and we'll just use defaults for everything
here.
We're not going to do anything visual this is is gonna be all V a code but basically the main thing
that I want to get across to you here is that I think the best way to think about a database is to think
of it as an Excel spreadsheet or a Google Sheet.
If you don't have if you've never used Microsoft Excel before but basically a s.
Q Well database consists of something called Well first the database and I would think of that if you
have like a spreadsheet file like this the whole file this is called the database.
And in this database you could have multiple tables.
So for example here you can see one table and maybe I'm you know for example in our example we're gonna
make a database that holds users.
So I would call this the users database.
OK so with this database let's say I want to store some information about users like I want to know
what their name is.
And I also want to know what their ages.
So these are like two pieces of information that I want to store about a particular user.
And then as you know I get more and more users.
I would add something.
I would insert something into this table so I would say OK there's someone named Nick.
And he's 28 years old.
And then there's someone named Sara.
And she is 35 years old.
There's someone named Jane.
She is six years old.
There's someone named Rob and we go.
And he is 14 years old and you can kind of just go like this and you are adding people to your table
here called users.
So really a database at the end of the day sort of represents the same thing that this sheet does.
So we're gonna come back and references but I just want you to have this idea in your mind.
So let's go ahead and open up Android Studio.
We're just gonna do everything here and on create.
And like I said I'm just going to show you how to get a table database set up and we're not going to
do any visual stuff we're just going to log out some information.
So step one for us to create an S Q L light database and I will mention if you want to know about more
about S Q Well and how databases work.
Please go Google it.
There's tons of information but hopefully I've got enough for you here to get off the ground.
So first thing that we're gonna create is an S Q A LIGHT database so capital Eskew a light database
and we'll just go ahead and call this my database.
There's nothing special about that name it's just a name that I created and we're gonna say this is
equal to this dot open or create database.
So the cool thing about this is when you want to create a new database you give it a name and by using
this open or create a saying hey if there's already an existing one well then I'll go ahead and just
open that.
But if there's not one then I'll go ahead and create it.
So this is kind of a cool function there.
So we have to give a name for our database which if we think about our spreadsheet example that would
be like naming this file.
And so if we come back to our example here I would maybe call this capital users like that but all the
lowercase there.
So that's typically what you do with the name of the databases you give the first letter of the capital
and everything else lowercase.
Then we have to set what kind of mode that we want this in.
And so just like we did with shared preferences let's do mode.
Private that says only this app can access this.
You know you could do something else if you want to let other apps access it but most the time you want
mode private.
And then lastly there's some special things you can do with exceptions.
But we're just going to put all for this.
We just want to go ahead and roll the default way.
So this is first line of code this creates a new database force or if that database already exists it
will open it back up for us.
And then once we have a database we need to create a table.
So again if we open up a new file we would have to create a new table for exists.
For example here may be called users.
So if we come back to Android Studio here we need to now take my database and we're going to do dot
e XY C S Q Well and this is short for execute Eskew well.
And again S Q Well is this whole separate language from like Java.
It's a way to interact with databases.
And so we're going to put some information into a string and the code that we put in there is s q well
and get if you want to learn more Eskew L you can definitely Google it but this is the code that we
write in order to like make tables insert things in there and you'll see as we go.
So typically Eskew well as in all capitals except for when you're working with the names of like databases
and variables table name stuff like that so we're going to type out just follow me here for a second.
All Caps create space table space if not a this and then we're gonna go lowercase users and then we're
gonna do in parentheses here we're going to say lower case name space var capital var char comma age
space capital int we're going to do parentheses put the number three inside of there and that's it.
Okay so this is what we're creating and essentially this is what this line of S Q Well Code says that
says create table if not exists.
Now the grammar on this isn't excellent but it's pretty close to English here we're saying make a new
table in this database if it doesn't exist.
Now if it does exist then it will just skip this line of code but as same as long as this doesn't exist
create a new table called the users and it's typically OK to call the name of one of your tables the
same thing as your fault your database.
That's usually fine.
So we're saying create a new table as long as it doesn't exist called users and then within that we
want to have two properties of a user.
Right.
We want to know the user's name and their age.
So if we go back to our example here in numbers.
So we made a new table called users and we said we want to know somebody whose name and their age.
Now with a database you have to be specific that you say Ok name are going to be something called a
var char in a var charge.
Just think of that as a string char is short for characters and it's saying it's a collection of characters
so name is a var char a.k.a. a string.
And then age is an int and the number that we pass in the parentheses is that's how many digits you
want to go to.
So I can't imagine someone being older than nine hundred and ninety nine years old.
So that's why I kept that as three.
But you know we could make this for 10 whatever it is that we want to be.
But in this case I think we're OK with three.
So yeah that's all that this line of code says it says make a new table called users and we're going
to have a name and age where name is a string and age represents an end.
OK.
So after that line of code the next thing that we're gonna do is we're actually going to put some information
into this table.
So that would be the equivalent of going to our spreadsheet here and saying you know Nick and putting
in 50 or something I guess or we already have Nick up there let's change this to a Rick for example.
So maybe let's just do this top on right.
Let's just add Nick with an age of 28.
So if we come back to our code here again we're gonna do my database start execute fast Q Well this
is how you connect with the database.
So it's looking for a string.
And in this one we're going to say in all caps insert N2 and we're trying to insert something into our
table which is called users here so we'll do lower case users.
So insert into users and what we're trying to insert is in both a name and an age.
So we put those both in parentheses comma separating the two and then we say what values are going to
be connected with those.
So we you say the values of and let's go ahead and put in parentheses first we're going to put the name
that we want to put through.
Go ahead and put whenever you're using a string or I guess technically a var char here in Eskew Well
you use single quotes.
So I'm going to put for example Nick right in there and then I'm going to say comma and then put it
an age like twenty eight.
OK so let's walk through what we did.
We said insert into users we want to add something into the user's table and we want to add a name and
an age and we're saying OK for name and the age here's the values.
So what's the name going to be equal to names going to be equal to Nick.
What's age going to be equal to age is equal to 28.
Okay.
And you'll notice for the name we had to put the single quote around it.
That's how we represent that and the age we just did a straight up number.
So that is the exact same thing as going to here and saying OK I'm going to add in insert Nick and he
has an age of 28.
I've inserted a row into this table.
OK.
So to make sure you're comprehending what's going on I want you to add one more person into your database
it may be yourself if you already put your own name and age in there.
Go ahead and pick someone else but add someone to your database.
Now all right hopefully that went well for you.
It's going to be very similar to what we have up top.
So I'm just going to copy and paste this and say insert into user's name and age but instead of Nick
in 28 maybe I'll do Sean who is let's do 33.
OK.
So now I have two people that are going to go inside of my database.
Now this is how you add people to a database the question then becomes how do you pull people out of
a database like how do you get someone's information.
Well you use something called a cursor.
So go ahead and just start typing out cursor hit enter to make sure you get the proper imports there.
Also cursor c is equal and that's usually what people call it cursor C cursor c b equal to my capital
database.
Dot raw query and a queries whenever you're pulling something out of the database here we're like creating
new tables inserting things in a queries when you're taking something back out.
So a raw query and we can have to provide a string with this and the string that we want to provide
is we're gonna say we just want to say give us every single thing that's inside of the user's table.
It'd be the same thing as saying give us everything that's listed down here.
So if we had maybe just to keep things consistent.
Right.
Thirty 33 we're saying give us both these lines.
And if there were more lines I'd say give me those but so we're gonna say Here call caps select star
capital from and then we're gonna give the name of the table which is lower case users in this select
star from us it saying select everything the star represents everything so we're saying select everything
from the table users.
All right.
Once you've provided the you well query we have to provide one more parameter.
And in this case there's some special things you can provide when you're doing a query but we're just
going to go ahead and put it all there.
So we'll just do that.
OK.
So with all of that in place the next thing that we want to do is if we want to access the name and
age we're gonna have to get the indexes for those and you might not know what an index is now but just
walk with me for a second here.
I to say index or int name index is equal to C dot get and we won't get column index and we're gonna
pass in the name of one of the columns so we're going to say name and if you're wondering what a column
is inside of a table.
So this would be considered a column.
This is the name column.
This is the age column so that's what it's going for here.
So it's come back to our code so we're saying we have a name index that says Get us the column index
for name there was a int age index.
It's going to be equal to C Dog get column index for age just like that all right.
So with these two pieces of information in place we have to take our cursor and get it to the starting
position so we're going to say see dot move to first.
And essentially what this does is we're saying hey move our cursor to the starting position which is
if we were looking at this here it would get us to Nick.
So it's sort of saying hey start right here ready to process this first row of code then you know it
can eventually move on to all the items.
So we're going to come back to Android Studio here and once we're at the first position we want to loop
through each row inside of the table right.
We want to go to here to here to here to here.
So we're going to set up a wall loop in order to do that so we're going to say Wall C is not equal to
null then we want to go ahead and do the following information.
So if there is nothing inside of the database see we'll be equal to nil and it won't run this code.
But if we say see you've moved to first and there is something there then C is going to have the information
for that first item.
So to get that information we're going to do a log.
We're going to say log dot I and we'll say this first is going to represent the name and then to get
the actual name information we're going to say see dot get string and we need to provide it.
You can see an ENT and we're going to provide it.
One of the name index to say that we want to get to the names we're going to go ahead and provide name
index there.
And that's going to get the string of whatever that person's name is and then it's afterward done with
this.
We're going to go ahead and loop on to the next one so we're going to say see dot move to next.
And that will go on to the next item and once it runs out of items see will eventually become null right
which at that point and we'll do that.
But what I want you to do is I want you to add the proper code to log out the age in addition to the
name.
So go ahead do it on your own make sure you can log out the age as well as a name hit pause.
Now OK.
Hopefully that went well for you.
It's almost the same thing as this except we're just want to know about the age.
So we've got to update this with age index.
OK.
So with this information in place you are ready to go ahead and give this a try.
So let's go ahead and run this on our emulator.
So we should see what happens is that when we run this it's going to come through and say hey open our
created database while we haven't created any data bases before so it's going to create this new database
called users that's going to say hey if this table doesn't exist create this new table called users
and because it doesn't exist it will create one and it's going to have a column for names and a column
for ages then we're going to add two people into that database.
So we're going to add one person named Nick who's 28 and one person named Sean who's 33 then once we've
added those two people to the table inside of the database we are going to do a query where we say hey
don't give us every single person inside of the user's table then we're gonna get the name index and
the age index so we can get the proper information from this query but then we're gonna get our cursor
moved to the very first one and then we're gonna do this while loop that says Okay print out the name
and age for the current place of the cursor is that and then we're gonna say see Dot moved to next in
this C dot move to next.
Essentially is doing this it's you know if we've started here and we're looking at this row when I say
see dot move the next moves down to the next row and moves down to the next to the next to the next.
So you know if there was a bunch of information like if we had this repeated a bunch of times right
it would move down and once it goes you know it's on this line it moves to the next and there's nothing.
Well that's when C would be equal to NULL which then means we would you know this while loop would stop.
So let's go ahead and open up blog cat see what information we got and let's go ahead and scroll the
top and look at that.
We have it printed out Nick 28 Shawn 33.
Now if we wanted to run this one more time it would come through.
It wouldn't recreate the database because it started there wouldn't recreate the table because already
there.
But it would add in the same users.
So in fact if we hit run here one more time we're going to see the number of users jump from two to
four.
So let's go ahead and look at log cat here and look at that.
The exact thing happened.
So we have Nick 28 Shawn 33 Nick 28 Shawn 33.
So if we want to make it so we don't add any more people we just comment out these two lines of code
and say look we don't need to do that anymore.
And now if we've run the app one more time
all right we'll give this a second to come around here.
Look at that.
It says Nick.
Sean.
Nick.
Sean so it only had the four people because we essentially said hey quit adding people to this we just
want to pull people out of it.
Now to confirm and make sure that you've really got a good grasp on this.
I have a challenge for you.
So I want you to do is to.
You can go back and reference the previous video to see some of this code to make sure you're doing
things correctly.
But what I want you to do is I want you to create a new database and a new table that represents some
events.
So in event table is going to have the name of the event.
It's also going to have the year in which that event happened.
So I'm kind of thinking like big world changing event type of thing.
So go ahead and recreate a completely new database and table where it's dealing with events.
Again the event is going to have a name.
And then also a year in which that event happened.
OK.
So go ahead hit pause.
Do that now all right.
So hopefully that went well for you.
We're gonna cut this out so that we can start from scratch here.
And if you've noticed we've had a couple of errors here with problems that happen and I should have
surrounded everything in a try catch to make this code a little bit more elegant.
So on this one we'll go ahead and do that.
So I set up a try catch skills to catch all those exceptions and we'll print those out and get them.
All right.
So with this try the first thing that we want to do.
Just like before is we're gonna get our database and this one I'll just call it lowercase as cool light
database.
And this is going to be equal to this dot open or create database.
And this time I'm going to call it capital events and I want this to be mode private.
And we don't need any special exception stuff.
So the sleeve that no.
Next thing that we've got to do is we've got to set up the table.
So we're gonna take as QoL light database dot executes on this.
Q Well on that and we're gonna say in all caps create table if not exists and we want that to be lowercase
events and then we'll go and say in parentheses an event should have a name which we should have represented
by a var char.
Okay a string.
Right.
And then we also want to have a year that we should be represented by an end and we should have this
in be at least four digits long.
Right.
Because a year nineteen fifty five nineteen forty seven whatever it is you want to be able to do the
four numbers there.
OK.
So that creates our table next we want to insert some data inside of there so again Askew a light database
that lets execute some as well.
So we're gonna say capital insert and we want to do in two events and we're gonna say we're gonna provide
a name and a year that's just the name of those two properties right.
And then the values for those properties are going to be.
So let's go ahead and let's we should correct this insert.
There we go.
So what's the name of some famous event.
Well I guess there was the the millennium which millennium.
I don't think I spelled that correctly but that was the year 2000 right.
Although I guess technically it was 2001 because the way the calendar works who knows what.
But everybody went crazy in the year 2000 for the millennium.
OK so that's one thing that we've got there.
Let's go ahead and go ahead and add another life event.
So this one was so monumental.
Next started teaching.
So that happened back in 2014 to me that's kind of a personal one like oh yeah that was a cool time.
And I've loved it ever since.
But so sorry.
Getting cheesy on you here but we've added we've created this event's table we've added some information
into it.
The next thing that we need to do is create our cursor so we'll make our cursor see that should be equal
to our rescue flight database.
Dot raw query and this is where we'll say select star from the events just like that.
We also want to provide a node there.
We don't need any special stuff then with this cursor we're going to get the event index and the year
index.
So we'll say and event index it's going to be equal to C dot get to column index for or I don't want
this to be event index I want it to be name index.
So we'll do that for name and we'll do the same thing but we want to copy it for year so we'll call
that year index and change that to b year.
All right.
So with all of that in place we're ready to say see dot move to first to get up to the first position
then we'll do our while loop here J and we'll say as long as C is not equal to null then we want to
log out some information.
So we're gonna say log dot I.
And with this we'll say results for the event is going to be equal to C dot to get string for the event
sorry the name index.
There we go.
And we want to do something similar for the results.
And that should be results name not event and then results.
Yea and then it's on this one.
I guess last time I did things a little bit improperly so if we're gonna grab an int from the database
we should probably instead of doing get string we should do dot get int and we'll provide the year index
there and then since we're gonna be logging this we have to say OK.
Capital integer to string and then we can go ahead and surround that there and then put our semicolon
on all that.
There we go.
Oh in this get rid of see dot get it.
OK.
So that should properly do all that and we got to make sure the while loop that we say see that moved
to next.
So if we don't have this move to not first move to next.
It's just going to keep looping and looping through that very first one.
That would be bad news for our situation here.
So let's go ahead and run run this is kind of our moment of truth and kind of just sort of confirm what's
going on here right.
If we followed this example in the spreadsheet it'd be like renaming this file to be the name of events
and then we would name this table to be events.
OK.
And it's not let me do a lower case there but the name of the table should be lower case than the name
of these properties.
We still want to keep name but this one is going to be a year.
Again those should be lower case but that's fine.
And it's like if we came and said OK the millennium was in the year 2000 we would even pulled over the
green text that was kind of cool.
And then if we come back to the code we copy Nick started teaching.
Boom.
We put it in 2014 there.
Make sure 2000.
All right.
So that's essentially what's happening here right.
So I just kind of do this example because I know databases can be a little bit of a foreign topic.
But let's go ahead and open a blog Kat.
See what we got here.
And if we open it up look at that.
It says Millennium 2000 Nick started teaching 2014 and also the air that we were getting before was
now appropriately handled with this exception.
So pretty cool stuff there.
All right.
Now that we've got that let's go ahead we still have some more details to learn about how to work with
the database.
But you know in the short little lecture you've had a proper introduction you've created two databases
now and you know you've got to learn a little bit more knowledge about how tables and insertion works.
You're looking great.
So let's keep moving forward.